APPENDIX B                                                                      
                                                                                
EXPLANATION OF DATA, PEOPLE, AND THINGS                                         
                                                                                
 Much of the information in this publication is based on the premise that       
every job requires a worker to function, to some degree, in relation to Data,   
People, and Things. These relationships are identified and explained below.     
They appear in the form of three listings arranged in each instance from the    
relatively simple to the complex in such a manner that each successive          
relationship includes those that are simpler and excludes the more complex.     
(As each of the relationships to People represents a wide range of complexity,  
resulting in considerable overlap among occupations, their arrangement is       
somewhat arbitrary and can be considered a hierarchy only in the most general   
sense.)  The identifications attached to these relationships are referred to    
as Worker Functions, and provide standard terminology for use in summarizing    
how a worker functions on the job.                                              
                                                                                
 The fourth, fifth, and sixth digits of the occupational code reflect           
relationships to Data, People, and Things, respectively.  These digits express  
a job's relationship to Data, People, and Things by identifying the highest     
appropriate function in each listing shown in the following table:              
                                                                                
   DATA              PEOPLE                  THINGS                             
(4th Digit)        (5th Digit)             (6th Digit)                          
                                                                                
0 Synthesizing     0 Mentoring            0 Setting Up                          
1 Coordinating     1 Negotiating          1 Precision Working                   
2 Analyzing        2 Instructing          2 Operating-Controlling               
3 Compiling        3 Supervising          3 Driving-Operating                   
4 Computing        4 Diverting            4 Manipulating                        
5 Copying          5 Persuading           5 Tending                             
6 Comparing        6 Speaking-            6 Feeding-Offbearing                  
                     Signalling           7 Handling                            
                   7 Serving                                                    
                   8 Taking                                                     
                     Instructions-Helping                                       
                                                                                
Definitions of Worker Functions                                                 
                                                                                
DATA: Information, knowledge, and conceptions, related to data, people, or      
  things, obtained by observation, investigation, interpretation,               
  visualization, and mental creation.  Data are intangible and include          
  numbers, words, symbols, ideas, concepts, and oral verbalization.             
                                                                                
0 Synthesizing:  Integrating analyses of data to discover facts and/or develop  
  knowledge concepts or interpretations.                                        
                                                                                
1 Coordinating:  Determining time, place, and sequence of operations or action  
  to be taken on the basis of analysis of data; executing determinations        
  and/or reporting on events.                                                   
                                                                                
2 Analyzing:  Examining and evaluating data.  Presenting alternative actions    
  in relation to the evaluation is frequently involved.                         
                                                                                
3 Compiling:  Gathering, collating, or classifying information about data,      
  people, or things.  Reporting and/or carrying out a prescribed action in      
  relation to the information is frequently involved.                           
                                                                                
4 Computing:  Performing arithmetic operations and reporting on and/or          
  carrying out a prescribed action in relation to them.  Does not include       
  counting.                                                                     
                                                                                
5 Copying:  Transcribing, entering, or posting data.                            
                                                                                
6 Comparing:  Judging the readily observable functional, structural, or         
  compositional characteristics (whether similar to or divergent from obvious   
  standards) of data, people, or things.                                        
                                                                                
 PEOPLE: Human beings; also animals dealt with on an individual basis as if     
   they were human.                                                             
                                                                                
0 Mentoring:  Dealing with individuals in terms of their total personality in   
  order to advise, counsel, and/or guide them with regard to problems that may  
  be resolved by legal, scientific, clinical, spiritual, and/or other           
  professional principles.                                                      
                                                                                
1 Negotiating:  Exchanging ideas, information, and opinions with others to      
  formulate policies and programs and/or arrive jointly at decisions,           
  conclusions, or solutions.                                                    
                                                                                
2 Instructing:  Teaching subject matter to others, or training others           
  (including animals) through explanation, demonstration, and supervised        
  practice; or making recommendations on the basis of technical disciplines.    
                                                                                
3 Supervising:  Determining or interpreting work procedures for a group of      
  workers, assigning specific duties to them, maintaining harmonious relations  
  among them, and promoting efficiency.  A variety of responsibilities is       
  involved in this function.                                                    
                                                                                
4 Diverting:  Amusing others,  usually through the medium of stage, screen,     
  television, or radio.                                                         
                                                                                
5 Persuading:  Influencing others in favor of a product, service, or point of   
  view.                                                                         
                                                                                
6 Speaking-Signaling:  Talking with and/or signaling people to convey or        
  exchange information.  Includes giving assignments and/or directions to       
  helpers or assistants.                                                        
                                                                                
7 Serving:  Attending to the needs or requests of people or animals or the      
  expressed or implicit wishes of people.  Immediate response is involved.      
                                                                                
8 Taking Instructions-Helping:  Attending to the work assignment instructions   
  or orders of supervisor. (No immediate response required unless               
  clarification of instructions or orders is needed.)  Helping applies to       
  ``non-learning'' helpers.                                                     
                                                                                
THINGS: Inanimate objects as distinguished from human beings, substances or     
   materials; and machines, tools, equipment, work aids, and products.  A       
   thing is tangible and has shape, form, and other physical characteristics.   
                                                                                
0 Setting Up:  Preparing machines (or equipment) for operation by planning      
  order of successive machine operations, installing and adjusting tools and    
  other machine components, adjusting the position of workpiece or material,    
  setting controls, and verifying accuracy of machine capabilities, properties  
  of materials, and shop practices. Uses tools, equipment, and work aids, such  
  as precision gauges and measuring instruments. Workers who set up one or a    
  number of machines for other workers or who set up and personally operate a   
  variety of machines are included here.                                        
                                                                                
1 Precision Working:  Using body members and/or tools or work aids to work,     
  move, guide, or place objects or materials in situations where ultimate       
  responsibility for the attainment of standards occurs and selection of        
  appropriate tools, objects, or materials, and the adjustment of the tool to   
  the task require exercise of considerable judgment.                           
                                                                                
2 Operating-Controlling:  Starting, stopping, controlling, and adjusting the    
  progress of machines or equipment.  Operating machines involves setting up    
  and adjusting the machine or material(s) as the work progresses.              
  Controlling involves observing gauges, dials, etc., and turning valves and    
  other devices to regulate factors such as temperature, pressure, flow of      
  liquids, speed of pumps, and reactions of materials.                          
                                                                                
3 Driving-Operating:  Starting, stopping, and controlling the actions of        
  machines or equipment for which a course must be steered or which must be     
  guided to control the movement of things or people for a variety of           
  purposes. Involves such activities as observing gauges and dials, estimating  
  distances and determining speed and direction of other objects, turning       
  cranks and wheels, and pushing or pulling gear lifts or levers.  Includes     
  such machines as cranes, conveyor systems, tractors, furnace-charging         
  machines, paving machines, and hoisting machines.  Excludes manually powered  
  machines, such as handtrucks and dollies, and power-assisted machines, such   
  as electric wheelbarrows and handtrucks.                                      
                                                                                
4 Manipulating:  Using body members, tools, or special devices to work, move,   
  guide, or place objects or materials.  Involves some latitude for judgment    
  with regard to precision attained and selecting appropriate tool, object, or  
  material, although this is readily manifest.                                  
                                                                                
5 Tending:  Starting, stopping, and observing the functioning of machines and   
  equipment.  Involves adjusting materials or controls of the machine, such as  
  changing guides, adjusting timers and temperature gauges, turning valves to   
  allow flow of materials, and flipping switches in response to lights.         
  Little judgment is involved in making these adjustments.                      
                                                                                
6 Feeding-Offbearing:  Inserting, throwing, dumping, or placing materials in    
  or removing them from machines or equipment which are automatic or tended or  
  operated by other workers.                                                    
                                                                                
7 Handling:  Using body members, handtools, and/or special devices to work,     
  move, or carry objects or materials.  Involves little or no latitude for      
  judgment with regard to attainment of standards or in selecting appropriate   
  tool, object, or materials.                                                   
