ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS                                                                
                                                                                
 The revised fourth edition of the Dictionary of Occupational Titles was        
produced by the U.S. Employment Service under the direction of Robert A.        
Schaerfl, Director.  The Occupational Analysis Program was directed by Clay     
Cottrell, Chief, Division of Planning and Operations. Coordination and          
technical supervision of the data collection effort was directed by John Hawk,  
Personnel Research Psychologist, with additional technical planning and         
support from Russ Kile and Donna Dye of the OA unit.                            
                                                                                
 The new data for this edition were developed through the efforts of the        
following Occupational Analysis Field Centers, operated through the State       
Employment Services: Boston, Massachusetts, Paul Cleary, Supervisor; Detroit,   
Michigan, Tom Kearney, Supervisor; St. Louis, Missouri, Doris Phelan,           
Supervisor; Raleigh, North Carolina; and Salt Lake City, Utah, Barbara Smith,   
Supervisor.  Grateful acknowledgement is also made for the contribution of      
Jerome Stevens and Bessie Kuhn, former Supervisors of the Missouri Field        
Center.                                                                         
                                                                                
 The North Carolina Occupational Analysis Field Center served a pivotal role    
in the planning, collection, preparation, and technical review of data for      
this revised edition, as well as its computerization and publication. Special   
recognition is due the staff of that center, including Mike Swaim, Bruce        
Paige, Larry Patterson, and Sammie Batchelor, and to their Supervisor, Stanley  
Rose.                                                                           
                                                                                
 Space does not permit a listing of their names, but grateful acknowledgement   
is also given to those associations, business firms, labor organizations,       
other Federal Agencies, and individuals whose assistance and cooperation        
contributed significantly to the development of this publication.               
                                                                                
