SPECIAL NOTICE                                                                  
                                                                                
 Occupational information contained in the revised fourth edition DOT reflects  
jobs as they have been found to occur, but they may not coincide in every       
respect with the content of jobs as performed in particular establishments or   
at certain localities.  DOT users demanding specific job requirements should    
supplement this data with local information detailing jobs within their         
community.                                                                      
                                                                                
 In using the DOT, it should be noted that the U.S. Employment Service has no   
responsibility for establishing appropriate wage levels for workers in the      
United States, or settling jurisdictional matters in relation to different      
occupations.  In preparing occupational definitions, no data were collected     
concerning these and related matters.  Therefore, the occupational information  
in this edition cannot be regarded as determining standards for any aspect of   
the employer-employee relationship. Data contained in this publication should   
not be considered a judicial or legislative standard for wages, hours, or       
other contractual or bargaining elements.                                       
                                                                                
 Material contained in this publication is in the public domain and may be      
reproduced fully or partially, without the permission of the Federal            
Government.  Source credit is requested but not required.                       
                                                                                
 Comments or inquiries regarding definitions or data elements included in the   
revised fourth edition DOT are invited and should be addressed to:              
                                                                                
Mr. Stanley Rose, Supervisor                                                    
North Carolina Occupational Analysis Field Center                               
North Carolina Employment Security Commission                                   
Post Office Box 27625                                                           
Raleigh, North Carolina  27611                                                  
                                                                                
Telephone inquiries may be made by calling (919) 733-7917.                      
                                                                                
