APPENDIX D                                                                      
                                                                                
HOW TO USE THE DOT FOR JOB PLACEMENT                                            
                                                                                
 Within the public Employment Service system the primary purpose for assigning  
a DOT code and title to a job applicant or employer job order is to facilitate  
the process of ``finding people for jobs and jobs for people''.  The            
occupational code is a method of searching files to locate qualified applicants 
and to match their qualifications with available job orders.  In some           
Employment Service offices, the Employment Service automated system provides    
on-line computerized access to job openings arranged in terms of DOT            
occupational codes making it possible for applicants to match their background  
and experience to job openings related to their interests.                      
                                                                                
 Proper classification of both job openings and job applicants is vital to the  
efficient operation of the Employment Service system, and to maintain the       
accuracy of statistical reporting systems which are based on the DOT coding     
structure. The coding structure of the DOT is specifically designed to          
facilitate this process. The unique 9-digit code shown for each occupation      
allows job interviewers to perform file searches providing the linkage between  
an applicant's work experience and employer job orders.                         
                                                                                
 The section entitled ``How to Find an Occupational Title and Code'' describes  
how to use the Occupational Group Arrangement, the Industry Arrangement, the    
Alphabetical Index and other DOT components to assure proper occupational       
coding of jobs and applicants.  The occupational classification system in the   
revised fourth edition of the DOT arranges occupational titles within a given   
technology in order of work-performance complexity. It can assist in            
identifying occupational progression and skill transfers vertically within a    
technology or horizontally among closely related technologies. Each             
occupational definition also provides essential job placement information by    
indicating the industry or industries in which a given occupation is found and  
by describing job tasks and task variables.                                     
                                                                                
  The use of the DOT for job placement is summarized here in relation to the    
following Employment Service operations: Classifying Job Applications;          
Classifying Job Orders; Matching Workers to Orders; and Assisting Special       
Applicant Groups.                                                               
                                                                                
1) Classifying Job Applicants                                                   
                                                                                
 Job interviewers will find it useful to structure the applicant interview in   
accordance with the way information is provided in a DOT occupational           
definition. By framing specific questions to elicit detailed information        
concerning the jobseeker's training, experience and preferences, a job          
interviewer can assess the individual in terms of fields of work, job content   
and worker requirements for an individual occupation in the Dictionary. An      
appropriate code number and job title can then be assigned to complete the      
interview process. (See ``How to Find an Occupational Title and Code''.)        
                                                                                
 To ensure the correct occupational code and title is assigned to each          
application, the following steps should be followed:                            
                                                                                
a) Using information obtained from the job seeker, make a tentative selection   
   of an occupational code and title.                                           
                                                                                
b) Review the requirements of the particular occupation selected, and match     
   them against past experience, training, job preferences, job interests and   
   any test or assessment results of the applicant to verify that the           
   occupation best fits the applicant for purposes of job placement.            
                                                                                
                                                                                
c) Supplement the data with labor market information reflecting job             
   opportunities in the local area.  Review all the information obtained and    
   assign a final primary occupational code and title to the applicant.  Be     
   sure the assigned code reflects the jobseeker's highest level of achievement 
   and ability.                                                                 
                                                                                
d) Additional codes and titles should be assigned as appropriate by repeating   
   the steps outlined above to identify the applicant's related skills and      
   training.                                                                    
                                                                                
2) Classifying Job Orders                                                       
                                                                                
 Assigning appropriate classification codes and titles to job openings is a     
process complementary to that of classifying job applicants.                    
                                                                                
 The order taker should review the structure content of job definitions in the  
Dictionary to assure that all of the required information needed for proper     
classification is obtained.  The information needed is that contained in the    
lead statement and task element statements of each occupational definition.     
(See ``Parts of the Occupational Definition''.)                                 
                                                                                
 Occupational definitions in the DOT are written to reflect the most typical    
characteristics of a job as it occurs in the American economy.  Task element    
statements in the definitions may not always coincide with the way work is      
performed in particular establishments or localities.                           
                                                                                
 If the occupational code and title is not easily determined, the DOT           
definition finally selected should be reviewed carefully.  If alternate methods 
of performing a job are described in the DOT definition, the order taker should 
review the definition with the employer to determine which description fits the 
firm's operation.  After determining which methods described in the DOT         
definition are actually used in the particular establishment involved, the      
order taker may assign an appropriate DOT code.                                 
                                                                                
 Only part of the jobs contained in the DOT are found in any given labor market 
area. In some instances, carefully developed desk aids containing titles, codes 
and definitions may be useful in assigning DOT codes and titles. However, a     
person or job should never be forced into a code simply because it is common in 
the local labor market.                                                         
                                                                                
3) Matching Workers to Orders                                                   
                                                                                
 The DOT occupational definitions are the bridge in the job-matching process,   
linking qualified applicants with suitable job openings.  Whether a placement   
office operates under a manual or computerized system, or is in transition, a   
successful job match is critically dependent upon correct input into the        
system.                                                                         
                                                                                
 The importance of correct input is more crucial, and reliance on the DOT       
classification system may be even greater, in the case of computer-assisted     
placement systems which include job matching.                                   
                                                                                
 Keep in mind that it is generally easier to find a good match when you know    
the following information:                                                      
                                                                                
. Job tasks workers are required to perform                                     
. The purpose of the work                                                       
. Machines, tools, equipment or work aids used                                  
. Materials, products, subject matter (academic discipline) or services         
  involved                                                                      
. Instructions received and the independent judgment that a worker exercises    
  during job performance                                                        
. Where the work is located (outdoors: on a farm, a forest tract, on water,     
  etc.; indoors: an office, a factory, school, etc.).                           
                                                                                
 Computerized Job Service matching can improve the efficiency of placement      
activities in a system by allowing  interviewers to use the DOT to:             
                                                                                
a) verify the accuracy and completeness of applications and job orders and      
   ensure appropriate classifications are assigned;                             
                                                                                
b) verify data on intake forms at the point of data entry and monitor the       
   output of program or labor market information; and                           
                                                                                
c) provide alternate search strategies using the DOT classification system      
   within the capabilities of the computerized system.                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
4) Assisting Special Applicant Groups                                           
                                                                                
Entry Level Workers                                                             
                                                                                
 Entry workers often have little or no training, education or job experience    
geared to specific occupational requirements.  They may also lack the necessary 
licenses or certification for certain jobs in which they express interest.  In  
one way or another, they may not be fully competitive with more experienced     
jobseekers.                                                                     
                                                                                
 An effective method of classifying such workers is to review the individual's  
educational background, interests, hobbies, casual or leisure time work         
experience, worker traits, and other indicators of potential occupational       
abilities and skills.  For example, if the applicant had an interest in science 
activities in school, they might be considered for a laboratory job if such     
openings are available in the area.  The final code assigned should allow the   
individual the greatest possible exposure to work or training opportunities in  
relation to interests, skills and abilities.                                    
                                                                                
 In a manual matching system, it is not usually possible to assign a 9-digit    
code to an entry worker, but every effort should be made to assign an           
appropriate 6-digit code and generalized title.  One method of indicating that  
the individual is an entry worker is to replace the period after the third      
digit in the occupational code with an (x). For example, if an entry worker is  
assigned the job title LABORATORY TESTER (any industry), the 6-digit code       
assigned would be 029x261.  In a computerized matching system, there is no      
standard method of recording entry classifications, since the recording         
procedures can vary from state to state.                                        
                                                                                
Veterans                                                                        
                                                                                
 U.S. veterans seeking civilian jobs are usually given preference in file       
search and referral activities by public employment service offices.  To give   
veterans the maximum opportunity to qualify for openings, both their civilian   
experience and the occupational training they received during their military    
careers must be fully reflected in their occupational classification and code.  
The inclusion of significant military occupations in the DOT assists in         
providing correct input and increases the chances of finding a job match.       
                                                                                
 The Department of Defense Military Career Guide 1988-1989, prepared in         
cooperation with the Department of Labor and published in 1987, is an important 
reference document in this area.  It consolidates occupational information from 
all branches of the Armed Services and related military-to-DOT occupations.     
                                                                                
Disabled Workers                                                                
                                                                                
 The procedure for coding entry workers may also be applied to disabled or      
differently-abled workers and applicants with limited or nonrelevant work       
experience registering under various assistance or human resource development   
programs. The interviewer must not assume that a disability automatically       
precludes a worker from performing a particular job. Companies will often make  
special accommodations to employ disabled persons (in fact, some accommodations 
are legally required).                                                          
                                                                                
 If a person has strong or special physical capabilities which would allow them 
to accommodate to certain tasks, these also should be taken into account. The   
interviewer may refer to the Handbook for Analyzing Jobs or his or her regional 
Occupational Analysis Field Center if he or she has any questions regarding the 
physical demands listed for a specific occupation in the DOT. Remember that     
additional information from testing and reinterviewing applicants may be used   
to review and/or revise an individual's assigned occupational classification.   
                                                                                
Other Special Applicants                                                        
                                                                                
 Persons in certain life situations may, based on the stressful nature of these 
situations, be considered in the category of special applicant. In addition to  
the applicant groups cited above, interviewers may be called upon to assist     
applicants who are difficult to place such as low-skilled youth, older workers, 
ex-offenders, drug abusers, seasonal or displaced reentrants to the labor       
market and others who need to work but challenge a counselor's placement        
skills. To most effectively place clients in available local jobs, interviewers 
must sometimes evaluate the broader needs and values of applicants including    
their work attitudes, personality and need for transitional support such as     
remedial education, medical or mental health care, transportation and day care. 
                                                                                
 The employment interviewer, to respond to this challenge, must try to          
determine the applicant's work resources including  abilities, interests,       
physical capabilities, work history and experience, education and leisure       
activities. Use of support material such as the Guide for Occupational          
Exploration and the Occupational Outlook Handbook (available at most libraries) 
is usually advisable. These easy-to-read books, published by the Department of  
Labor, provide information on several job factors including specific work       
duties, training and education, earnings, working conditions and future         
opportunities.                                                                  
                                                                                
 The important thing is not the job title, but the skills and abilities         
required by the job. An applicant whose experience and aptitudes are matched to 
an occupation never considered before is a real success story. The interviewer, 
with effective use of the DOT, can play a pivotal role in that process.         
