HOW TO FIND AN OCCUPATIONAL TITLE AND CODE                                      
                                                                                
 Occupational titles and codes in the Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT)   
are based on the type of information presented in the lead statement and task   
element statements described in the previous section:  worker actions; the      
purpose or objective of these actions; machines, tools, equipment, or work aids 
used; materials processed, products made, subject matter dealt with, or service 
rendered; the nature and complexity of instructions followed; and the job tasks 
actually performed by the worker.  The more complete and comprehensive the      
information you are able to assemble about the tasks performed by a worker or   
required by an employer on a particular job, the easier it will be to determine 
the appropriate classification.                                                 
                                                                                
The Three Occupational Arrangements                                             
                                                                                
 There are three different arrangements of occupational titles in the DOT:  the 
Occupational Group Arrangement, the Alphabetical Index, and the Industry        
Arrangement.  All of these can assist you in identifying and classifying jobs.  
                                                                                
 1) The Occupational Group Arrangement                                          
                                                                                
 In this revised edition, as in the fourth edition, the primary method of       
identifying or classifying jobs is by use of the Occupational Group Arrangement 
(see Occupational Categories, Divisions, and Groups).  For job placement and    
referral purposes, if you have obtained sufficient information from the worker  
seeking a job, or the employer placing an order, this is the preferred method to
use.  The other two arrangements of titles are supplementary and should be used 
in conjunction with the Occupational Group Arrangement.  Using the Occupational 
Group Arrangement saves time by eliminating the extra step of referring to other
sections of the DOT.                                                            
                                                                                
 To use the Occupational Group Arrangement:                                     
                                                                                
 a) Obtain all the relevant facts about the job.                                
                                                                                
 b) Find the 1-digit occupational category which seems most likely to contain   
    the job.                                                                    
                                                                                
 c) Find the most appropriate 2-digit occupational division of the category.    
                                                                                
 d) Find the best 3-digit group within the division.                            
                                                                                
 e) Examine the occupational definition under the group you have selected and   
    choose the most appropriate title.  Read the definition for the title       
    selected carefully before deciding if this is the best possible             
    classification.  If it does not correspond closely with the information     
    you have collected, repeat steps (b) to (d) to find the most appropriate    
    classification.                                                             
                                                                                
 In the process of choosing the appropriate occupational category, division, and
group (steps b - d) you will develop information about the job which will be    
helpful in classifying it.  When you are trying to find the most appropriate    
definition in the occupational group selected (step e), remember that jobs      
requiring more responsibility and independent judgment have lower worker        
functions numerals and will be found near the beginning of the occupational     
group, while those requiring less responsibility and independent judgment have  
higher numbers and will be found nearer the end.                                
                                                                                
 2)  The Alphabetical Index of Occupational Titles                              
                                                                                
 The Alphabetical Index is the second basic arrangement of codes and titles in  
the DOT.  In this section, titles are shown first, including their industry     
designation.  Titles with two or more words, such as ACCOUNT-CLASSIFICATION     
CLERK (clerical), are treated as one word for purposes of alphabetizing.        
Following the industry designation, you will find the 9-digit code for the      
occupation.  This will help to find quickly the title and its definition in the 
Occupational Group Arrangement (OGA).  The Alphabetical Index is useful if you  
are sure of an occupational title, including its industry designation, and just 
need the 9-digit code, or if you are reasonably sure of a title and its industry
designation, but there is more than one such title in the same industry         
(indicated by a Roman numeral), you could use this index to get the 9-digit     
codes of the various titles in order to locate and check out their definitions  
in the OGA.  Although it is unwise to classify a job or application based on its
title alone, the Alphabetical Index is useful in some situations to identify    
definitions that are possibly relevant.                                         
                                                                                
 To use the Alphabetical Index:                                                 
                                                                                
 a) Look through the index for the title of the job as you know it.  If you     
    find it, write down the 9-digit code printed to the right of the title.     
    Using this code as a guide, find the definition for the title in the        
    Occupational Group Arrangement.  Read the entire definition before          
    deciding whether it is the most appropriate classification.                 
                                                                                
 b) If you cannot find the job title, or if the definition appears              
    inappropriate, look for another title.  Some clues are:                     
                                                                                
   Invert the title: maintenance carpenter                                      
    CARPENTER, MAINTENANCE                                                      
                                                                                
   Contract the title: rubber-belt repairer                                     
    BELT REPAIRER                                                               
                                                                                
   Find a synonym: car mechanic                                                 
    AUTOMOBILE MECHANIC                                                         
                                                                                
  Consider such factors as:                                                     
                                                                                
   Job location                                                                 
    PARKING LOT ATTENDANT; STOREROOM CLERK                                      
                                                                                
  Machines used                                                                 
    PUNCH-PRESS OPERATOR; MACHINE FEEDER                                        
                                                                                
   Materials used                                                               
   LOG LOADER; PLASTIC-TILE LAYER                                               
                                                                                
   Subject matter                                                               
    ACCOUNTING CLERK; CREDIT ANALYST                                            
                                                                                
   Services involved                                                            
    CLEANER AND PRESSER; BROKER                                                 
                                                                                
   Activity performed                                                           
    TEACHER; INSPECTOR                                                          
                                                                                
   Job complexity                                                               
    MACHINE SETTER; WELDING-MACHINE TENDER                                      
                                                                                
 If you have information on several of these factors, however, it may be more   
appropriate to use the Occupational Group Arrangement.                          
                                                                                
 Some titles listed in the Alphabetical Index are not used in public employment 
service operations.  ``Master'' and ``Term'' titles do not have occupational    
codes and consequently cannot be used.  They are easily recognized since the    
words ``Master Title'' or ``Term Title'' appear in place of the code to the     
right of the title.  Alternate titles, which are synonyms for, but less commonly
used than base titles, are not standard titles for classification purposes in   
Job Service operations.  They are also easily recognizable since they are in    
lower-case letters.                                                             
                                                                                
3) Occupational Titles Arranged by Industry Designation                         
                                                                                
 The Industry Arrangement of titles may be useful if you have limited           
information about a job.  You may know the industry in which the job is located,
but have little or no information about such things as products made, materials 
used, services rendered, and other essential data.  The Industry Arrangement can
also be of assistance if a person wants to work in a particular industry, or if 
you need to learn more about related jobs in the industry.                      
                                                                                
 To use the Industry Arrangement:                                               
                                                                                
 a) Look through the industry titles and read their definitions.  Select the    
    one most likely to contain the particular job.                              
                                                                                
 b) Survey the occupational titles listed under the selected industry.  Choose  
    the title which seems appropriate to the job, and write down the            
    nine-digit code to the right of the title.  Using this code as a guide,     
    find the definition in the Occupational Group Arrangement.  Read the        
    entire occupational definition before deciding if it is the most            
    appropriate classification.                                                 
                                                                                
Summary                                                                         
                                                                                
 The basic purpose and use of each of the three arrangements of occupational    
titles is shown below:                                                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
Use . . .     If you . . .                                                      
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
THE                     have sufficient information about the job tasks         
                                                                                
OCCUPATIONAL            want to know about other closely related occupations    
                                                                                
GROUP                   want to be sure you have chosen the most appropriate    
                                                                                
ARRANGEMENT             classification using the other arrangements             
                                                                                
------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
OCCUPATIONAL TITLES     know only the industry in which the job is located      
                                                                                
ARRANGED BY             want to know about other jobs in an industry            
                                                                                
INDUSTRY DESIGNATION    your client wants to work in a specific industry        
                                                                                
------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
THE ALPHABETICAL        know only the job title                                 
                                                                                
INDEX OF                and cannot obtain better                                
                                                                                
OCCUPATIONAL TITLES     information                                             
                                                                                
------------------------------------------------------------------------------  
