PREFATORY NOTE                                                                  
                                                                                
 In the 14 years since the release of the Fourth Edition of the Dictionary of   
Occupational Titles (DOT), the American workplace has undergone revolutionary   
change.  The skills most in demand are not what they were 14 years ago;         
educational requirements have steadily increased. Too many of America's young   
people are entering the world of work inadequately prepared. The resulting      
dislocation - the so-called ``skills gap'' - presents those of us who prepare,  
hire or support American workers with a serious challenge.                      
                                                                                
 The revised Fourth Edition of the DOT is an important part of the Department   
of Labor's response. It provides an updated picture of the occupations for      
which America's workforce must be prepared. It details the tasks to be          
performed and the levels of education that must be achieved. The DOT offers a   
starting place from which to address issues of training and education, career   
guidance and employment counseling, job definition and wage restructuring.      
                                                                                
 We in ETA are pleased to present the revised Fourth Edition DOT. We hope that  
this update will make it an even more valuable reference for its substantial    
body of readers.                                                                
                                                                                
ROBERTS T. JONES                                                                
Assistant Secretary                                                             
for Employment and Training                                                     
                                                                                
