APPENDIX C                                                                      
                                                                                
COMPONENTS OF THE DEFINITION TRAILER                                            
                                                                                
 The following descriptions of the components of the Definition Trailer are in  
inverse order to their placement in the trailer.                                
                                                                                
I. DATE OF LAST UPDATE (DLU)                                                    
                                                                                
 Listed as the final element in the trailer following the definition, the Date  
of Last Update indicates the last year in which material was gathered for that  
occupation.  A DLU of ``77'' would indicate that the occupation has not been    
studied by an analyst since publication of the fourth edition DOT in 1977.      
                                                                                
II. SPECIFIC VOCATIONAL PREPARATION (SVP)                                       
                                                                                
 Specific Vocational Preparation is defined as the amount of lapsed time        
required by a typical worker to learn the techniques, acquire the information,  
and develop the facility needed for average performance in a specific           
job-worker situation.                                                           
                                                                                
 This training may be acquired in a school, work, military, institutional, or   
vocational environment.  It does not include the orientation time required of a 
fully qualified worker to become accustomed to the special conditions of any    
new job. Specific vocational training includes:  vocational education,          
apprenticeship training, in-plant training, on-the-job training, and essential  
experience in other jobs.                                                       
                                                                                
 Specific vocational training includes training given in any of the following   
circumstances:                                                                  
                                                                                
a. Vocational education (high school; commercial or shop training; technical    
   school; art school; and that part of college training which is organized     
   around a specific vocational objective);                                     
                                                                                
b. Apprenticeship training (for apprenticeable jobs only);                      
                                                                                
c. In-plant training (organized classroom study provided by an employer);       
                                                                                
d. On-the-job training (serving as learner or trainee on the job under the      
   instruction of a qualified worker);                                          
                                                                                
e. Essential experience in other jobs (serving in less responsible jobs which   
   lead to the higher grade job or serving in other jobs which qualify).        
                                                                                
 The following is an explanation of the various levels of specific vocational   
preparation:                                                                    
                                                                                
Level   Time                                                                    
                                                                                
  1     Short demonstration only                                                
  2     Anything beyond short demonstration up to and including 1 month         
  3     Over 1 month up to and including 3 months                               
  4     Over 3 months up to and including 6 months                              
  5     Over 6 months up to and including 1 year                                
  6     Over 1 year up to and including 2 years                                 
  7     Over 2 years up to and including 4 years                                
  8     Over 4 years up to and including 10 years                               
  9     Over 10 years                                                           
                                                                                
  Note: The levels of this scale are mutually exclusive and do not overlap.     
                                                                                
III. GENERAL EDUCATIONAL DEVELOPMENT (GED)                                      
                                                                                
 General Educational Development embraces those aspects of education (formal    
and informal) which are required of the worker for satisfactory job             
performance.  This is education of a general nature which does not have a       
recognized, fairly specific occupational objective.  Ordinarily, such education 
is obtained in elementary school, high school, or college.  However, it may be  
obtained from experience and self-study.                                        
                                                                                
 The GED Scale is composed of three divisions:  Reasoning Development,          
Mathematical Development, and Language Development. The description of the      
various levels of language and mathematical development are based on the        
curricula taught in schools throughout the United States.  An analysis of       
mathematics courses in school curricula reveals distinct levels of progression  
in the primary and secondary grades and in college.  These levels of            
progression facilitated the selection and assignment of six levels of GED for   
the mathematical development scale.                                             
                                                                                
 However, though language courses follow a similar pattern of progression in    
primary and secondary school, particularly in learning and applying the         
principles of grammar, this pattern changes at the college level.  The          
diversity of language courses offered at the college level precludes the        
establishment of distinct levels of language progression for these four years.  
                                                                                
Consequently, language development is limited to five defined levels of GED     
inasmuch as levels 5 and 6 share a common definition, even though they are      
distinct levels.                                                                
                                                                                
SCALE OF GENERAL EDUCATION DEVELOPMENT (GED)                                    
                                                                                
REASONING DEVELOPMENT                                                           
                                                                                
LEVEL 6                                                                         
                                                                                
Apply principles of logical or scientific thinking to a wide range of           
intellectual and practical problems. Deal with nonverbal symbolism              
(formulas, scientific equations, graphs, musical notes, etc.) in its most       
difficult phases. Deal with a variety of abstract and concrete variables.       
Apprehend the most abstruse classes of concepts.                                
                                                                                
LEVEL 5                                                                         
                                                                                
Apply principles of logical or scientific thinking to define problems,          
collect data, establish facts, and draw valid conclusions. Interpret an         
extensive variety of technical instructions in mathematical or diagrammatic     
form. Deal with several abstract and concrete variables.                        
                                                                                
LEVEL 4                                                                         
                                                                                
Apply principles of rational systems* to solve practical problems and deal      
with a variety of concrete variables in situations where only limited           
standardization exists. Interpret a variety of instructions furnished in        
written, oral, diagrammatic, or schedule form.                                  
                                                                                
* Examples of rational systems are: bookkeeping, internal combustion engines,   
electric wiring systems, house building, farm management, and navigation.       
                                                                                
LEVEL 3                                                                         
                                                                                
Apply commonsense understanding to carry out instructions furnished in written, 
oral, or diagrammatic form.  Deal with problems involving several concrete      
variables in or from standardized situations.                                   
                                                                                
LEVEL 2                                                                         
                                                                                
Apply commonsense understanding to carry out detailed but uninvolved written or 
oral instructions.  Deal with problems involving a few concrete variables in or 
from standardized situations.                                                   
                                                                                
LEVEL 1                                                                         
                                                                                
Apply commonsense understanding to carry out simple one- or two-step instruc-   
tions. Deal with standardized situations with occasional or no variables in or  
from these situations encountered on the job.                                   
                                                                                
MATHEMATICAL DEVELOPMENT                                                        
                                                                                
LEVEL 6                                                                         
                                                                                
Advanced calculus: Work with limits, continuity, real number systems, mean      
value theorems, and implicit function theorems.                                 
                                                                                
Modern algebra: Apply fundamental concepts of theories of groups, rings, and    
fields.  Work with differential equations, linear algebra, infinite series,     
advanced operations methods, and functions of real and complex variables.       
                                                                                
Statistics: Work with mathematical statistics, mathematical probability and     
applications, experimental design, statistical inference, and econometrics.     
                                                                                
LEVEL 5                                                                         
                                                                                
Algebra:  Work with exponents and logarithms, linear equations, quadratic       
equations, mathematical induction and binomial theorem, and permutations.       
                                                                                
Calculus:  Apply concepts of analytic geometry, differentiations, and           
integration of algebraic functions with applications.                           
                                                                                
Statistics: Apply mathematical operations to frequency distributions,           
reliability and validity of tests, normal curve, analysis of variance,          
correlation techniques, chi-square application and sampling theory, and factor  
analysis.                                                                       
                                                                                
LEVEL 4                                                                         
                                                                                
Algebra:  Deal with system of real numbers; linear, quadratic, rational,        
exponential, logarithmic, angle and circular functions, and inverse functions;  
related algebraic solution of equations and inequalities; limits and            
continuity; and probability and statistical inference.                          
                                                                                
Geometry:   Deductive axiomatic geometry, plane and solid, and rectangular      
coordinates.                                                                    
                                                                                
Shop Math: Practical application of fractions, percentages, ratio and           
proportion, measurement, logarithms, practical algebra, geometric construction, 
and essentials of trigonometry.                                                 
                                                                                
LEVEL 3                                                                         
                                                                                
Compute discount, interest, profit, and loss; commission, markup, and selling   
price; ratio and proportion; and percentage. Calculate surfaces, volumes,       
weights, and measures.                                                          
                                                                                
Algebra: Calculate variables and formulas; monomials and polynomials; ratio and 
proportion variables; and square roots and radicals.                            
                                                                                
Geometry: Calculate plane and solid figures, circumference, area, and volume.   
Understand kinds of angles and properties of pairs of angles.                   
                                                                                
LEVEL 2                                                                         
                                                                                
Add, subtract, multiply, and divide all units of measure.  Perform the four     
operations with like common and decimal fractions.  Compute ratio, rate, and    
percent.  Draw and interpret bar graphs. Perform arithmetic operations          
involving all American monetary units.                                          
                                                                                
LEVEL 1                                                                         
                                                                                
Add and subtract two-digit numbers. Multiply and divide 10's and 100's by 2, 3, 
4, 5. Perform the four basic arithmetic operations with coins as part of a      
dollar. Perform operations with units such as cup, pint, and quart; inch, foot, 
and yard; and ounce and pound.                                                  
                                                                                
LANGUAGE DEVELOPMENT                                                            
                                                                                
LEVEL 6 (Same as Level 5.)                                                      
                                                                                
LEVEL 5                                                                         
                                                                                
Reading: Read literature, book and play reviews, scientific and technical       
journals, abstracts, financial reports, and legal documents.                    
                                                                                
Writing: Write novels, plays, editorials, journals, speeches, manuals,          
critiques, poetry, and songs.                                                   
                                                                                
Speaking: Conversant in the theory, principles, and methods of effective and    
persuasive speaking, voice and diction, phonetics, and discussion and debate.   
                                                                                
LEVEL 4                                                                         
                                                                                
Reading: Read novels, poems, newspapers, periodicals, journals, manuals,        
dictionaries, thesauruses, and encyclopedias.                                   
                                                                                
Writing:  Prepare business letters, expositions, summaries, and reports, using  
prescribed format and conforming to all rules of punctuation, grammar, diction, 
and style.                                                                      
                                                                                
Speaking: Participate in panel discussions, dramatizations, and debates. Speak  
extemporaneously on a variety of subjects.                                      
                                                                                
LEVEL 3                                                                         
                                                                                
Reading: Read a variety of novels, magazines, atlases, and encyclopedias.  Read 
safety rules, instructions in the use and maintenance of shop tools and         
equipment, and methods and procedures in mechanical drawing and layout work.    
                                                                                
Writing: Write reports and essays with proper format, punctuation, spelling,    
and grammar, using all parts of speech.                                         
                                                                                
Speaking: Speak before an audience with poise, voice control, and confidence,   
using correct English and well-modulated voice.                                 
                                                                                
LEVEL 2                                                                         
                                                                                
Reading: Passive vocabulary of 5,000-6,000 words. Read at rate of 190-215 words 
per minute. Read adventure stories and comic books, looking up unfamiliar words 
in dictionary for meaning, spelling, and pronunciation. Read instructions for   
assembling model cars and airplanes.                                            
                                                                                
Writing: Write compound and complex sentences, using cursive style, proper end  
punctuation, and employing adjectives and adverbs.                              
                                                                                
Speaking: Speak clearly and distinctly with appropriate pauses and emphasis,    
correct punctuation, variations in word order, using present, perfect, and      
future tenses.                                                                  
                                                                                
LEVEL 1                                                                         
                                                                                
Reading: Recognize meaning of 2,500 (two- or three-syllable) words.  Read at    
rate of 95-120 words per minute.  Compare similarities and differences between  
words and between series of numbers.                                            
                                                                                
Writing: Print simple sentences containing subject, verb, and object, and       
series of numbers, names, and addresses.                                        
                                                                                
Speaking: Speak simple sentences, using normal word order, and present and past 
tenses.                                                                         
                                                                                
IV.PHYSICAL DEMANDS - STRENGTH RATING (Strength)                                
                                                                                
 The Physical Demands Strength Rating reflects the estimated overall strength   
requirement of the job, expressed in terms of the letter corresponding to the   
particular strength rating.  It represents the strength requirements which are  
considered to be important for average, successful work performance.            
                                                                                
 The strength rating is expressed by one of five terms:  Sedentary, Light,      
Medium, Heavy, and Very Heavy.  In order to determine the overall rating, an    
evaluation is made of the worker's involvement in the following activities:     
                                                                                
a. Standing, Walking, Sitting                                                   
                                                                                
 Standing - Remaining on one's feet in an upright position at a work station    
 without moving about.                                                          
                                                                                
 Walking - Moving about on foot.                                                
                                                                                
 Sitting - Remaining in a seated position.                                      
                                                                                
b. Lifting, Carrying, Pushing, Pulling                                          
                                                                                
 Lifting - Raising or lowering an object from one level to another (includes    
 upward pulling).                                                               
                                                                                
 Carrying - Transporting an object, usually holding it in the hands or arms, or 
 on the shoulder.                                                               
                                                                                
 Pushing - Exerting force upon an object so that the object moves away from     
 the force (includes slapping, striking, kicking, and treadle actions).         
                                                                                
 Pulling - Exerting force upon an object so that the object moves toward the    
 force (includes jerking).                                                      
                                                                                
 Lifting, pushing, and pulling are evaluated in terms of both intensity and     
duration.  Consideration is given to the weight handled, position of the        
worker's body, and the aid given by helpers or mechanical equipment.  Carrying  
most often is evaluated in terms of duration, weight carried, and distance      
carried.                                                                        
                                                                                
 Estimating the Strength factor rating for an occupation requires the exercise  
of care on the part of occupational analysts in evaluating the force and        
physical effort a worker must exert.  For instance, if the worker is in a       
crouching position, it may be much more difficult to push an object than if     
pushed at waist height.  Also, if the worker is required to lift and carry      
continuously or push and pull objects over long distances, the worker may exert 
as much physical effort as is required to similarly move objects twice as       
heavy, but less frequently and/or over shorter distances.                       
                                                                                
c. Controls                                                                     
                                                                                
 Controls entail the use of one or both arms or hands (hand/arm) and/or one or  
both feet or legs (foot/leg) to move controls on machinery or equipment.        
Controls include but are not limited to buttons, knobs, pedals, levers, and     
cranks.                                                                         
                                                                                
 Following are descriptions of the five terms in which the Strength Factor is   
expressed:                                                                      
                                                                                
S - Sedentary Work - Exerting up to 10 pounds of force occasionally             
  (Occasionally: activity or condition exists up to 1/3 of the time) and/or a   
  negligible amount of force frequently (Frequently: activity or condition      
  exists from 1/3 to 2/3 of the time) to lift, carry, push, pull, or otherwise  
  move objects, including the human body.  Sedentary work involves sitting most 
  of the time, but may involve walking or standing for brief periods of time.   
  Jobs are sedentary if walking and standing are required only occasionally and 
  all other sedentary criteria are met.                                         
                                                                                
L - Light Work - Exerting up to 20 pounds of force occasionally, and/or up to   
  10 pounds of force frequently, and/or a negligible amount of force constantly 
  (Constantly: activity or condition exists 2/3 or more of the time) to move    
  objects.  Physical demand requirements are in excess of those for Sedentary   
  Work.  Even though the weight lifted may be only a negligible amount, a job   
  should be rated Light Work: (1) when it requires walking or standing to a     
  significant degree; or (2) when it requires sitting most of the time but      
  entails pushing and/or pulling of arm or leg controls; and/or (3) when the    
  job requires working at a production rate pace entailing the constant pushing 
  and/or pulling of materials even though the weight of those materials is      
  negligible.                                                                   
                                                                                
 NOTE:  The constant stress and strain of maintaining a production rate pace,   
especially in an industrial setting, can be and is physically demanding of a    
worker even though the amount of force exerted is negligible.                   
                                                                                
M - Medium Work - Exerting 20 to 50 pounds of force occasionally, and/or 10 to  
  25 pounds of force frequently, and/or greater than negligible up to 10 pounds 
  of force constantly to move objects. Physical Demand requirements are in      
  excess of those for Light Work.                                               
                                                                                
H - Heavy Work - Exerting 50 to 100 pounds of force occasionally, and/or 25 to  
  50 pounds of force frequently, and/or 10 to 20 pounds of force constantly to  
  move objects. Physical Demand requirements are in excess of those for Medium  
  Work.                                                                         
                                                                                
V - Very Heavy Work - Exerting in excess of 100 pounds of force occasionally,   
  and/or in excess of 50 pounds of force frequently, and/or in excess of 20     
  pounds of force constantly to move objects. Physical Demand requirements are  
  in excess of those for Heavy Work.                                            
                                                                                
V. GUIDE FOR OCCUPATIONAL EXPLORATION (GOE)                                     
                                                                                
 Many youths and other jobseekers are unprepared for an effective job search    
because of a lack of knowledge about the kinds of jobs to look for. They have   
difficulty relating their interest, skills, and potentials to appropriate       
occupations. To be effective, vocational counselors must have sufficient        
information to match an individual's interest, temperaments, potential ability  
and other personal traits to specific career fields and work requirements.      
                                                                                
 The Guide for Occupational Exploration  was designed by the US Employment      
Service to provide career counselors and other DOT users with additional        
information about the interests, aptitudes, entry level preparation and other   
traits required for successful performance in various occupations. The GOE is   
also useful in self-assessment and counselor-assisted settings to help people   
understand themselves realistically in regard to their ability to meet job      
requirements. Descriptive information provided for each work group assists the  
individual in evaluating his or her own interests and relating them to          
pertinent fields of work.                                                       
                                                                                
 The GOE code assigned to a definition provides a link between the occupation   
defined and the GOE arrangement of occupations with similar interests,          
aptitudes, adaptability requirements, and other descriptors.                    
                                                                                
 The GOE coding structure classifies jobs at three levels of consideration.     
The first level divides occupations according to twelve interest areas          
corresponding to interest factors identified through research conducted by the  
former Division of Testing in the US Employment Service.  The interest factors, 
identified by a two-digit code, are defined in terms of broad interest          
requirements of occupations as well as vocational interests of individuals.     
The twelve interest areas are defined as follows:                               
                                                                                
01 Artistic        05 Mechanical       09 Accommodating                         
                                                                                
02 Scientific      06 Industrial       10 Humanitarian                          
                                                                                
03 Plants-Animals  07 Business Detail  11 Leading-Influencing                   
                                                                                
04 Protective      08 Selling          12 Physical Performing                   
                                                                                
 The interest areas are then subdivided into work groups (the second set of two 
digits within the six-digit GOE code).  Each work group contains occupations    
requiring similar worker traits and capabilities in related work settings.  The 
GOE contains descriptive information for each work group and identifies each    
occupation in the group with a four-digit code and title.  In many interest     
areas, occupations that require the most education, training, and experience    
are in the first group, while those requiring less formal education or          
experience are listed in the last group.                                        
                                                                                
 Work groups are then subdivided into subgroups (the third two-digit set in the 
GOE code) of occupations with even more homogeneous interests, aptitudes, and   
adaptability requirements.  Each subgroup is identified by its unique six-digit 
code and title.  Individual occupations are listed alphabetically within        
subgroups.  Some subgroups contain  occupations from more than one industry,    
listed within alphabetized industries.                                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
