FOREWORD                                                                        
                                                                                
 The Dictionary of Occupational Titles (DOT) has been, since 1939, a vital      
part of the USES commitment to collect and disseminate occupational data that   
is comprehensive, up-to-date, and economically useful.  This revision of the    
Fourth Edition culminates a decade of research and verification by more than    
40 job analysts at five Occupational Analysis centers across the Nation and     
reflects the changing skills, knowledges and abilities of the American          
workforce.                                                                      
                                                                                
 As was true of earlier versions, this revised Fourth Edition provides a wide   
range of occupational information with application to job placement,            
occupational research, career guidance, labor-market information, curriculum    
development and long-range job planning. Data from the 1982 and 1986 DOT        
Supplements and part of the data from Selected Characteristics of Occupations   
Defined in the DOT are included in and superseded by this revision.             
                                                                                
 The revision has enhanced information contained in the occupational            
definitions in response to user feedback. A number of new occupations have      
also been added that were originally identified by DOT users and given          
temporary codes and titles under the Occupational Code Request program.  We     
thank previous users for these improvements.  We hope that users of this        
revised Fourth Edition will continue to help us keep the DOT up to date.        
                                                                                
ROBERT A. SCHAERFL                                                              
Director                                                                        
U. S. Employment Service                                                        
                                                                                
