PARTS OF THE OCCUPATIONAL DEFINITION                                            
                                                                                
 Work is organized in a variety of ways.  As a result of technological,         
economic, and sociological influences, nearly every job in the economy is       
performed slightly differently from any other job.  Every job is also similar   
to a number of other jobs.                                                      
                                                                                
 In order to look at the millions of jobs in the U.S. economy in an organized   
way, the DOT groups jobs into ``occupations'' based on their similarities and   
defines the structure and content of all listed occupations.  Occupational      
definitions are the result of comprehensive studies of how similar jobs are     
performed in establishments across the nation and are composites of data        
collected from diverse sources.  The term ``occupation,'' as used in the DOT,   
refers to this collective description of a number of individual jobs performed, 
with minor variations, in many establishments.                                  
                                                                                
 There are seven basic parts to an occupational definition.  They present data  
about a job in a systematic fashion.  The parts are listed below in the order   
in which they appear in every definition:                                       
                                                                                
 1) The Occupational Code Number                                                
 2) The Occupational Title                                                      
 3) The Industry Designation                                                    
 4) Alternate Titles (if any)                                                   
 5) The Body of the Definition                                                  
     a) Lead Statement                                                          
     b) Task Element Statements                                                 
     c) ``May'' Items                                                           
     d) Glossary words                                                          
     e) Unbracketed Reference Title                                             
     f) Bracketed Title                                                         
 6) Undefined Related Titles (if any)                                           
 7) Definition Trailer                                                          
                                                                                
 The seven basic parts of a definition are preceded in the following example    
definition by their identifying number and/or letter and ) symbol as used in    
the list above.  An explanation of each part, preceded by the same identifiers, 
follows the example.                                                            
                                                                                
EXAMPLE DEFINITION                                                              
                                                                                
1) 652.382-010 2) CLOTH PRINTER 3) (any industry) 4) alternate titles: printer; 
printing-machine operator                                                       
                                                                                
5) 5a) Sets up and operates machine to print designs on materials, such as      
cloth, fiberglass, plastic sheeting, coated felt, or oilcloth: 5b) Turns        
handwheel to set pressure on 5d) $T3printing rollers,$T1 according to           
specifications. 5b) Turns screws to align register marks on printing rollers    
with register marks on machine, using allen wrench. 5b) Sharpens doctor blade,  
using file and oilstone, and verifies evenness of blade, using straightedge.    
5b) Aligns doctor blade against printing roller, using handtools. 5b) Dips      
color from tubs into color boxes to supply printing rollers. 5b) Scans cloth    
leaving machine for printing defects, such as smudges, variations in color      
shades, and designs that are out of register (alignment). 5b) Realigns printing 
rollers and adjusts position of blanket or back gray cloth to absorb excess     
color from printing rollers. 5b) Records yardage of cloth printed. 5b)          
Coordinates printing activities with activities of workers who feed and doff    
machine and aid in setting up and cleaning machine. 5c) May notify              
5e) COLORIST (profess. & kin.) 022.161-014 when color shade varies from         
specifications. 5c) May mix own colors. 5c) May mount printing rollers on       
machine for change of pattern 5f) [PRINTING-ROLLER HANDLER (textile)            
652.385-010!. 5c) May position knives specified distance from edge of plastic   
material to trim excess material from edges. When printing samples of new       
patterns and novelty designs, is designated 6) Novelty-Printing-Machine         
Operator (textile) or 6) Proofing-Machine Operator (print. & pub.). 5c) May set 
up and operate cloth printing machine utilizing caustic soda paste instead of   
color paste to print designs on cloth which shrink to form plisse and be        
designated 5c) Plisse-Machine Operator (textile).                               
7) GOE: 06.02.09 STRENGTH: M GED: R4 M1 L3 SVP: 7 DLU: 77                       
                                                                                
                                                                                
1) The Occupational Code Number                                                 
                                                                                
 The first item in an occupational definition is the 9-digit occupational code  
(in the preceding example, 652.382-010).  In the DOT occupational               
classification system, each set of three digits in the 9-digit code number has  
a specific purpose or meaning.  Together, they provide a unique identification  
code for a particular occupation which differentiates it from all others.       
                                                                                
 The first three digits identify a particular occupational group.  All          
occupations are clustered into one of nine broad ``categories'' (first digit),  
such as professional, technical and managerial, or clerical and sales           
occupations.  These categories break down into 83 occupationally specific       
``divisions'' (the first two digits), such as occupations in architecture and   
engineering within the professional category, or stenography, typing, and       
related occupations in the clerical and sales category.  Divisions, in turn,    
are divided into small, homogeneous ``groups'' (the first three digits)-564     
such groups are identified in the DOT.  The nine primary occupational           
categories are listed below:                                                    
                                                                                
 0/1 Professional, Technical, and Managerial Occupations                        
   2 Clerical and Sales Occupations                                             
   3 Service Occupations                                                        
   4 Agricultural, Fishery, Forestry, and Related Occupations                   
   5 Processing Occupations                                                     
   6 Machine Trades Occupations                                                 
   7 Benchwork Occupations                                                      
   8 Structural Work Occupations                                                
   9 Miscellaneous Occupations                                                  
                                                                                
 In the example, the first digit (6) indicates that this particular occupation  
is found in the category, ``Machine Trades Occupations.''  (For a listing of    
all occupational categories, divisions, and groups see page xxix.)              
                                                                                
 The second digit refers to a division within the category.  The divisions      
within the ``Machine Trades Occupations'' category are as follows:              
                                                                                
 60    Metal Machining Occupations                                              
 61    Metalworking Occupations, n.e.c.                                         
 62/63 Mechanics and Machinery Repairers                                        
 64    Paperworking Occupations                                                 
 65    Printing Occupations                                                     
 66    Wood Machining Occupations                                               
 67    Occupations in Machining Stone, Clay, Glass, and Related Materials       
 68    Textile Occupations                                                      
 69    Machine Trades Occupations, n.e.c.                                       
                                                                                
 Some divisions or groups end in the designation ``n.e.c.'' (not elsewhere      
classified).  This indicates that the occupations do not logically fit into     
precisely defined divisions or groups, or that they could fit into two or more  
of them equally well.                                                           
                                                                                
 In the example, the second digit (5) locates the occupation in the ``Printing  
Occupations'' division.                                                         
                                                                                
 The third digit defines the occupational group within the division.  The       
groups within the ``Printing Occupations'' division are as follows:             
                                                                                
 650 Typesetters and Composers                                                  
 651 Printing Press Occupations                                                 
 652 Printing Machine Occupations                                               
 653 Bookbinding-Machine Operators and Related Occupations                      
 654 Typecasters and Related Occupations                                        
 659 Printing Occupations, n.e.c.                                               
                                                                                
 In the example, the third digit (2) locates the occupation in the ``Printing   
Machine Occupations'' group.                                                    
                                                                                
 The middle three digits of the DOT occupational code are the Worker Functions  
ratings of the tasks performed in the occupation.  Every job requires a worker  
to function to some degree in relation to data, people, and things.  A separate 
digit expresses the worker's relationship to each of these three groups:        
                                                                                
   DATA              PEOPLE                  THINGS                             
(4th Digit)        (5th Digit)             (6th Digit)                          
                                                                                
0 Synthesizing     0 Mentoring            0 Setting Up                          
1 Coordinating     1 Negotiating          1 Precision Working                   
2 Analyzing        2 Instructing          2 Operating-Controlling               
3 Compiling        3 Supervising          3 Driving-Operating                   
4 Computing        4 Diverting            4 Manipulating                        
5 Copying          5 Persuading           5 Tending                             
6 Comparing        6 Speaking-            6 Feeding-Offbearing                  
                     Signalling           7 Handling                            
                   7 Serving                                                    
                   8 Taking                                                     
                     Instructions-Helping                                       
                                                                                
 As a general rule, Worker Functions involving more complex responsibility and  
judgment are assigned lower numbers in these three lists while functions which  
are less complicated have higher numbers.  For example, ``synthesizing'' and    
``coordinating'' data are more complex tasks than ``copying'' data;             
``instructing'' people involves a broader responsibility than ``taking          
instructions-helping''; and ``operating'' things is a more complicated task     
than ``handling'' things.                                                       
                                                                                
 The Worker Functions code in the example (382) relates to the middle three     
digits of the DOT occupational code and has a different meaning and no          
connection with group code 652 (first three digits).                            
                                                                                
 The Worker Functions code (382) may be found in any occupational group.  It    
signifies that the worker is ``compiling'' (3) in relation to data; ``taking    
instructions-helping'' (8) in relation to people; and  ``operating-             
controlling'' (2) in relation to things.  The Worker Functions code indicates   
the broadest level of responsibility or judgment required in relation to data,  
people, or things.  It is assumed that, if the job requires it, the worker can  
generally perform any higher numbered function listed in each of the three      
categories.  (See Appendix B for a more detailed discussion of Worker Functions 
codes.)                                                                         
                                                                                
 The last three digits of the occupational code number serve to differentiate a 
particular occupation from all others.  A number of occupations may have the    
same first six digits, but no two can have the same nine digits.  If a 6-digit  
code is applicable to only one occupational title, the final three digits       
assigned are always 010 (as in the example).  If there is more than one         
occupation with the same first six digits, the final three digits are usually   
assigned in alphabetical order of titles in multiples of four (010, 014, 018,   
022, etc.).  If another printing machine occupation had the same six digits as  
CLOTH PRINTER (any industry) 652.382-010, and began with the letter ``D,'' it   
would be assigned the occupational code 652.382-014.  In order to minimize the  
number of changes made to the existing occupational classification structure,   
``new'' occupations added to the DOT since the publication of the Fourth        
Edition have simply been added sequentially following the previous last entry   
for each of the 6-digit codes. The full nine digits thus provide each           
occupation with a unique code suitable for computerized operations.             
                                                                                
2) The Occupational Title                                                       
                                                                                
 Immediately following the occupational code in every definition is the         
occupational base title.  The base title is always in upper-case boldface       
letters.  It is the most common type of title found in the DOT, and is the      
title by which the occupation is known in the majority of establishments in     
which it was found.  In the example, CLOTH PRINTER (any industry) 652.382-010   
is a base title.                                                                
                                                                                
 a) Master Titles                                                               
                                                                                
 Some titles are classified as master titles.  These titles are designed to     
eliminate unnecessary repetition of tasks common to a large number of           
occupations.  Master titles define the common job tasks having a wide variety   
of job variables and wide variety of titles.  An example is the title           
``SUPERVISOR (any industry)''.  Each individual supervisory occupation has its  
own separate definition in the DOT describing its unique duties, but at the end 
of the definition the reader is referred to the master definition; in this case 
by a sentence reading: ``Performs other duties as described under SUPERVISOR    
(any industry) Master Title''.  By referring to this master definition, the     
user will learn about the typical supervisory duties which are commonly         
performed.                                                                      
                                                                                
 b) Term Titles                                                                 
                                                                                
 Another type of DOT title is a term title.  These include occupations with the 
same title but few common duties.  An example of a term definition is:          
                                                                                
 CONSULTING ENGINEER (profess. & kin.):  A term applied to workers who consult  
with and advise clients on specialized engineering matters in a particular      
field of endeavor, such as chemical engineering, civil engineering, or          
mechanical engineering.                                                         
                                                                                
 Since neither master nor term definitions are occupations, they are not coded  
in the Occupational Group Arrangement but are found in separate sections of the 
DOT (see Contents).                                                             
                                                                                
 There are other major types of titles used in the DOT, including alternate     
titles and undefined related titles.  These are discussed later in this         
section.                                                                        
                                                                                
 3) Industry Designation                                                        
                                                                                
 The industry designation is in parentheses immediately following the           
occupational base title.  It often differentiates between two or more           
occupations with identical titles but different duties.  Because of this, it is 
an integral and inseparable part of any occupational title.  An industry        
designation often tells one or more things about an occupation such as:         
                                                                                
- location of the occupation (hotel & rest.; machine shop)                      
- types of duties associated with the occupation (education; forging)           
- products manufactured (optical goods; textile)                                
- processes used (electroplating; petrol. refin.)                               
- raw materials used (nonfer. metal; stonework)                                 
                                                                                
 While a definition usually receives the designation of the industry or         
industries in which it occurs, certain occupations occur in a large number of   
industries.  When this happens, the industry assigned is a cross-industry       
designation.  For example, clerical occupations are found in almost every       
industry.  To show the broad, cross-industry nature of clerical occupations,    
``clerical'' is an industry designation in itself.  Among other cross-industry  
designations are: ``profess. & kin.'', ``machine shop'', and ``woodworking''.   
                                                                                
 Occupations which characteristically occur in nearly all industries, or which  
occur in a number of industries, but not in most industries and which are not   
considered to have any particular industrial attachment, are assigned the       
designation of ``any industry.''  The job title in the example is assigned this 
designation.  It should always be identified as CLOTH PRINTER (any industry)    
652.382-010.                                                                    
                                                                                
 In compiling information for the DOT, analysts were not able to study each     
occupation in all industries where it occurs.  The industry designation,        
therefore, shows in what industries the occupation was studied but does not     
mean that it may not be found in others.  Therefore, industry designations are  
to be regarded as indicative of industrial location, but not necessarily        
restrictive.                                                                    
                                                                                
4) Alternate Titles                                                             
                                                                                
 An alternate title is a synonym for the base title.  It is not as commonly     
used as the base title.  Alternate titles are shown in lower-case letters       
immediately after the base title and its industrial designation.  In the        
example, two alternate titles are given: ``printer'' and ``printing-machine     
operator''. Alternate titles may not be used by public employment service       
offices in assigning occupational classifications.  Alternate titles are        
cross-referenced to their base titles in the Alphabetical Index of Occupational 
Titles. A particular occupation may have a large number of alternate titles or  
none at all.  Alternate titles carry the code numbers and industry designations 
of the base title.                                                              
                                                                                
5) The Body of the Definition                                                   
                                                                                
 The body of the definition usually consists of two or three main parts: a lead 
statement, a number of task element statements, and a third part known as a     
``may'' item.                                                                   
                                                                                
 a) The Lead Statement                                                          
                                                                                
 The first sentence following the industry designation and alternate titles (if 
any) is the lead statement.  It is followed by a colon (:). The lead statement  
summarizes the entire occupation. It offers essential information such as:      
                                                                                
 - worker actions                                                               
 - objective or purpose of the worker actions                                   
 - machines, tools, equipment, or work aids used by the worker                  
 - materials used, products made, subject matter dealt with, or services        
   rendered                                                                     
 - instructions followed or judgments made                                      
                                                                                
 In the example, the sentence ``Sets up and operates machine to print designs   
on materials, such as cloth, fiberglass, plastics sheeting, coated felt, or     
oilcloth:'' is the lead statement.  From it, the user can obtain an overview of 
the occupation.                                                                 
                                                                                
 b) Task Element Statements                                                     
                                                                                
 Task element statements indicate the specific tasks the worker performs to     
accomplish the overall job purpose described in the lead statement.  The        
sentences in the example beginning with ``Turns handwheel . . . '', ``Turns     
screws . . . '', ``Sharpens doctor . . . '', ``Aligns doctor . . . '', ``Dips   
color . . . '', etc. are all task element statements.  They indicate how the    
worker actually carries out the job duties.                                     
                                                                                
 c) ``May'' Items                                                               
                                                                                
 Many definitions contain one or more sentences beginning with the word         
``May''. They describe duties required of workers in this occupation in some    
establishments but not in others.  The word ``May'' does not indicate that a    
worker will sometimes perform this task but rather that some workers in         
different establishments generally perform one of the varied tasks listed.  In  
the example, the three sentences beginning ``May notify. . .'', ``May mount. .  
.'', ``May position. . .'', are ``May'' items.  Do not confuse ``May'' items    
with the ``May be designated. . .'' sentence which introduces undefined related 
titles.                                                                         
                                                                                
 d) Glossary Words                                                              
                                                                                
 Any word in a definition preceded by $T3 and followed by $T1 is defined in the 
``Glossary'. These words (italicized in the printed version of the DOT) are     
technical or special uses of words not ordinarily found in a dictionary. In the 
example, the words ``printing rollers'' are preceded by $T3 and followed by     
$T1.  Their precise meaning can be found in the ``Glossary''.                   
                                                                                
 e) Unbracketed titles                                                          
                                                                                
 Unbracketed titles are used for occupations that have a frequent working       
relationship with the occupation defined.  In the example, the CLOTH PRINTER    
(any industry) 652.382-010 has a close working relationship with a COLORIST     
(profess. & kin.) 022.161-014. This unbracketed title is therefore included in  
the definition.                                                                 
                                                                                
 f) Bracketed titles                                                            
                                                                                
 A bracketed title indicates that the worker in the base title occupation       
performs some duties of the bracketed occupation as a part of the worker's      
regular duties.  In the example, the CLOTH PRINTER (any industry) 652.382-010   
``May mount printing rollers. . .'' Since this task is usually performed by a   
PRINTING-ROLLER HANDLER (textile) 652.385-010, this occupation is bracketed. To 
learn more about this particular aspect of the occupation, the user can read    
the definition of the bracketed occupational title.                             
                                                                                
 Some definitions also contain a number of additional information elements      
designed to assist the user. Among these elements are:                          
                                                                                
 Roman numerals                                                                 
                                                                                
 Several somewhat different occupations with the same job title may be found in 
the same industry.  In this event, a Roman numeral follows each title.  For     
example, there are two titles in the DOT listed as ASSEMBLER (ordnance).  In    
order to distinguish between them, a Roman numeral is assigned to each one:     
ASSEMBLER (ordnance) I 736.381-010 and ASSEMBLER (ordnance) II 736.684-014.     
There is no connection in the sequence of these numbers with the level of       
complexity of these occupations or the frequency with which they occur in the   
U.S. economy.                                                                   
                                                                                
 Statement of significant variables                                             
                                                                                
 Another element found in some definitions is a statement of significant        
variables. It appears near the end of a definition and indicates possible       
variations that can occur in jobs. This eliminates the need to include a large  
number of almost identical definitions in the DOT.  The statement begins with   
``Important variations include. . .''. There is no statement of significant     
variables in the definition of CLOTH PRINTER (any industry) 652.382-010.        
                                                                                
 6) Undefined Related Titles                                                    
                                                                                
 Undefined related titles, when applicable, appear at the end of the            
occupational definition, with initial capital letters, preceded by a phrase,    
such as ``May be designated according to. . .''.  In the example, three         
undefined related titles are given: Novelty-Printing-Machine-Operator           
(textile), Proofing-Machine Operator (print. & pub.), and Plisse-Machine        
Operator (textile). This type of title indicates a variation or specialization  
of the base occupation.  It resembles the base enough to accompany it, but      
differs from it enough to require an explanatory phrase and its own unique      
title.  An undefined related title has the same code as its base title.         
Undefined related titles found in occupational definitions are listed in the    
Alphabetical Index of Occupational Titles in initial capital letters.  The      
entry includes the industry designation and the 9-digit code of the             
corresponding base title. In addition, undefined related titles appear in       
alphabetical order with their nine-digit code under their appropriate industry  
in the list of Occupational Titles Arranged by Industry Designation.            
                                                                                
 7) Definition Trailer                                                          
                                                                                
 Selected characteristics and auxiliary profile data are contained in a         
``trailer'' appended to each definition.  The trailer contains the following    
selected occupational analysis characteristics:  GOE Code; Strength rating; R,  
M, and L of GED; and SVP.  (Refer to Appendix C for a detailed explanation of   
these characteristics.)                                                         
                                                                                
 The Date of Last Update (DLU), the last item in the trailer, is the date of    
the most recent material gathered in support of that occupation.  The date      
``1977'' indicates that the job has not been studied since the publication of   
the Fourth Edition DOT in 1977 (See Appendix A.)  This entry allows the reader  
to identify the currency of each definition.  It will also provide easy         
identification of definitions ``new'' to the DOT or alert the reader to         
previously published and recently updated definitions.                          
                                                                                
                                                                                
                                                                                
